# rcsp

A revised perl script to manage a small private Certificate Authority (CA)
based on CSP-0.3.4 by *Leif Johansson*.
Revised by James B. Byrne <byrnejb@harte-lyne.ca>

This is a command line driven application used to create and administer
a private Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).

This script is simply a small wrapper around OpenSSL.
It likely will not scale well but for small organisations requiring
a publiclly accessable Certificate Policy (CP) and
Certificate Practices Statement (CPS) together with providing
web accessible and downloadable PEM and DER formats for fewer
than several hundred generated certificates this should suffice.

More complete documentation can be obtained from cspguide.pdf found
in the `docs` directory.

# Getting started

Administrating Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Certificate Authorities (CA)
using CSP.

2016-Nov-01 byrnejb@Harte-Lyne.ca

This procedure creates an `X509` PKI with a root CA with subordinate CAs
issing end-use certificate. For reasons of security the private keys of
all CA's that form part of a deployed PKI should be kept offline and
physically secured when not in use.  Likewise, all private keys of any
end-use certificates must be controlled in the same fashion.

Whenever a CA private key is in use then the host employed should be first
disconnected from all networks (LAN and Internet). Consequently It will
likely prove most convenient to keep the CA directory trees on removable
media such as USB flash memory sticks or SD cards. When so employed
removable media must be stored in a secure location and only inserted
into the host used to manage the PKI when required and under direct
supervision of an authorised user.

It is advised that a separate user id be created solely for the purpose
of administering the PKI.  Failing that then a system priviledged user
should be used. In either case care must be taken that any situation
where the private keys might be compromised is never permitted to arise.
That implies that the medium holding the CA keys is never left unsecured;
or unobserved when in use; or inserted into a host that has multiple user
access enabled.

## A note on private key encypherment passwords

OpenSSL permits the use of key encypherment pass phrases that include
embedded spaces.  However, the `csp` script presently passes all its
arguments to `openssl` as a single string.  The method used to call
`openssl` from within the perl script treats a space as a delimiter
for arguments passed in this fashion. As single or double quotes
are stripped by the Perl module used to invoke `openssl` there is no
method of escaping pass-phrases that contain spaces.

Thus it is not possible to use a pass-phrase containing spaces with csp.
If such a phrase is desired then `openssl rsa` must be called directly to
reset the key encryption phrase after it is created:

```
openssl rsa -v -aes256 -in short_password.key -out passwd_with_spaces.key
```

# Creating a root CA

Some applications no longer allow self-signed certificates to be added
their trusted certificate store.  Thus, to meet this requirement, it is
necessary that a private PKI use a CA other than their root CA to issue
end-use certificates.

Generally speaking, when subordinate issuing CAs are employed in a PKI,
the root CA is only used to create additional issuing CA's; or replacements
for compromised issuing CA's.

## Add the csp script location to your PATH

```
PATH=$PATH:/path/to/csp/
```

## Create the CA home directory.

```
mkdir -p /path/to/my-ca
cd /path/to/my-ca
```

## Copy the csp/ca/etc directory tree from the csp install location.

```
cp -pr /path/to/csp/ca/etc ./etc
```

## Define the required environment variables

```
export CSPHOME=$(pwd)
export OPENSSL=$(which openssl)
```

## Create the root CA.

```
csp CA_ROOT_2016 create
```

Copy a localised extensions.conf template file into ./csp or modify
the default extensions.conf in place. At a minimum you need to change
all *example.com* references to your local domain.

```
cp ./extensions.conf.ca_hll_root ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/extensions.conf
```

## Initialise the root CA.

This can be done in one step if one does not care what time of day the
certificate expires. However, if that route is taken then there is no
entry made in the root's certificate database for its own certificate
and the time of expiry is the same as the time of day when its
own certificate is created.

To specify an exact time of day to expire (i.e. midnight UTC) one
cannot use the default `openssl ca` command as that only takes as an
argument the number of days to expiry. Instead issue a certificate
signing request by specifying a csr file. Then self sign that request
providing the exact expiry date, time and timezone.  This requires
that we first capture the csp generated `openssl.conf` file since
`openssl` requires a vaild config file to operate.

The temporary config file generated by csp may be retained by defining
the environment variable `CSPDEBUG`. The resulting `csp-9999.conf` file
is found in `./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/`. The exact serial number
will vary and a new `csp-xxxx.conf` file created each time a csp command
is issued.

```
export CSPDEBUG=true # any value or none, it just needs to be defined.
```

## Initialise the root CA

Create a signing request file `ca.csr` instead of automatically self-signing
the CA certificate by specifying `--csrfile=`.

```
csp CA_ROOT_2016 init \
  --type=root \
  --keysize=4096  \
  --digest=sha512 \
  --url=ca.harte-lyne.ca \
  --email=certificates@harte-lyne.ca \
  --csrfile=./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/csrs/ca.csr \
  "CN=CA_ROOT_2016,OU=Networked Data Services,\
  O=Harte & Lyne Limited,L=Hamilton,ST=Ontario,C=CA,DC=harte-lyne,DC=ca"
```

Copy the generated conf file from `./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp`
to `./CA_ROOT_2016.conf`

```
ls -l ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/*conf
-rw-rw-r--. 1 cspuser cspuser 2966 Nov  1 13:52 ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/csp-9999.conf

cp ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/csp-9999.conf ./CA_ROOT_2016.conf
```

## Self-sign the request using the copied configuration file.

Note that the start and end date arguments have the expected effect
on the certificate validity date and time.

```
openssl ca  \
  -selfsign  \
  -config ./CA_ROOT_2016.conf \
  -startdate 20161101000000Z  \
  -enddate 20361031235959Z \
  -keyfile ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/private/ca.key \
  -infiles ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/csrs/ca.csr
```

This creates the first certificate, `01.pem`, in the
`./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs/` directory.  Note that `csp` serialises
certificate numbers in hexadecimal.  When the tenth certicicate is
produced the serial number will be `0A` and the certificate will be
saved as `0A.pem`.

The first serial number defaults to `01`. This can be changed by
modifying the `serial` file for the CA.  If this modification is
made then take care not to introduce the possibility of reusing
previously issued serial numbers.  The value is best left alone
once the first certificate is issued by the CA.

```
echo 20160001 > ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/serial
```

The example above causes certificate serial numbers to start at
20160001 (hexadecimal).

## Copy the created pem certificate to the CA's home directory.

`csp` expects that the CA certificate is called `ca.crt` and resides
in the root of the CA's working directory.  `csp` also expects that its
private key will likewise be named `ca.key` and reside in the
`private/` directory under the CA's working directory root.

If the default `csp CANAME init` path is taken and a separate `ca.csr`
request is not generated then both these files are placed in those
locations automatically. As the example above does not follow that path
some further housekeeping is required.

Copy `./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs/01.pem to /csp/CA_ROOT_2016/ca.crt`.

```
cp ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs/01.pem to /csp/CA_ROOT_2016/ca.crt
```

Do not delete, remove or rename `./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs/01.pem` or
any other file comprising the CA database. The serial number must be the
name of a certificate's associated `.pem` file and this must reside in
the `certs/` directory. Likewise the `index.txt` file must not be edited,
removed or renamed.

Manually manipulating files in the CA database has a very real risk of
damaging the PKI to the point of uselessness.  The exception being
`extensions.conf` which often requires customisation for a specific
signing request.

> Warning:
> Do not even try to reuse a serial number or attempt to clean up
> the CA database following a botched issue or signing attempt.
> Serial numbers are cheap and limitless.  Just revoke the resulting
> certificate and move on to the next number.

## Create the issuing CA key and certificate.

```
csp CA_ROOT_2016 request \
  --type=ca  \
  --keyfile=./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/CA_ISSUER_2016.key \
  --keysize=4096 \
  --digest=sha512 \
  --url=ca.harte-lyne.ca \
  --email=certificates@harte-lyne.ca \
  --csrfile=./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/csrs/CA_ISSUER_2016.csr \
  "CN=CA_ISSUER_2016,OU=Networked Data Services,O=Harte & Lyne Limited,L=Hamilton,ST=Ontario,C=CA,DC=harte-lyne,DC=ca"
```

## Sign the request.

Because `csp` does not use `openssl ca` to sign requests one can
specify the exact end-date and time in the signing command.

```
csp CA_ROOT_2016 sign \
  --type=ca  \
  --digest=sha512 \
  --startdate=20161101000000Z \
  --enddate=20351101235959Z \
  --url=ca.harte-lyne.ca \
  --email=certificates@harte-lyne.ca \
  --csrfile=./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/csrs/CA_ISSUER_2016.csr
```

## Check that the certificate is in the certs directory

```
ls -l ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs
total 24
-rw-rw-r--. 1 cspuser cspuser 9556 Nov  1 14:00 01.pem
-rw-rw-r--. 1 cspuser cspuser 9569 Nov  1 15:38 02.pem
```

## Move the new issuing CA's private key

```
mv ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/tmp/CA_ISSUER_2016.key ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/private/keys/
```

This is the key which we will use for the issuing CA setup that follows.

## This completes the self-signed root CA creation

# Create the issuing CA

These steps are very similar to those used to create the root CA.

```
csp create

tree csp
csp
├── CA_ISSUER_2016
│   ├── certs
│   ├── crl_extensions.conf
│   ├── csrs
│   ├── extensions.conf
│   ├── index.txt
│   ├── private
│   │   └── keys
│   ├── public_html
│   │   ├── certs
│   │   │   ├── cert.html.mpp
│   │   │   ├── expired.html.mpp
│   │   │   ├── index.html.mpp
│   │   │   ├── revoked.html.mpp
│   │   │   └── valid.html.mpp
│   │   └── index.html.mpp
│   ├── serial
│   └── tmp
└── CA_ROOT_2016
    ├── ca.crt
    ├── certs
    │   ├── 01.pem
    │   └── 02.pem
    ├── crl_extensions.conf
    ├── crl-v1.crl
    ├── crl-v1.pem
    ├── crl-v2.crl
    ├── crl-v2.pem
    ├── csrs
    │   ├── ca.csr
    │   └── CA_ISSUER_2016.csr
    ├── extensions.conf
    ├── index.txt
    ├── index.txt.attr
    ├── index.txt.attr.old
    ├── private
    │   ├── ca.key
    │   └── keys
    │       ├── CA_ISSUER_2016.key
    │       └── CA_ROOT_2016.key
    ├── public_html
    │   ├── certs
    │   │   ├── cert.html.mpp
    │   │   ├── expired.html.mpp
    │   │   ├── index.html.mpp
    │   │   ├── revoked.html.mpp
    │   │   └── valid.html.mpp
    │   └── index.html.mpp
    ├── serial
    └── tmp
```

## Initialise the new issuing CA using the certificate created above.

```
csp CA_ISSUER_2016 init --crtfile=./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/certs/02.pem
```

## Copy the CA's private key from the root CA's key store

The PKI hierarchy desends from the root CA.  So the issing CA's private
key and public certificate must be copied from the root CA store into the
new issuing CA's directory tree.

```
cp from ./csp/CA_ROOT_2016/private/keys/CA_ISSUER_2016.key \
        ./csp/CA_ISSUER_2016/private/ca.key
```

## Check and if necessary modify the permission bits on all the key files to 600.

```
chmod 600 ./csp/CA_ISSUER_2016/private/ca.key
```

## Copy or modify in place the localised 'extensions.conf' file.

In practice this file will require modification for nearly every
certificate issued.  This is the main reason that CSP is not suited
for a large scale deployment.

```
cp ./extensions.conf.ca_hll_issuer ./csp/CA_ISSUER_2016/extensions.conf
```
## Generate the crls and public web sites for the new PKI.

```
mkdir -p ./public_html/CA_ROOT_2016/ ./public_html/CA_ISSUER_2016/
tree public_html
public_html
├── CA_ISSUER_2016
└── CA_ROOT_2016

2 directories, 0 files

for CSPCA in CA_ROOT_2016 CA_ISSUER_2016; \
 do  csp $CSPCA gencrl; \
     csp $CSPCA genpublic --export=./public_html/$CSPCA; \
 done;

tree ./public_html
./public_html
├── CA_ISSUER_2016
│   ├── ca.crt
│   ├── certdb.xml
│   ├── certs
│   │   ├── expired.html
│   │   ├── index.html
│   │   ├── revoked.html
│   │   └── valid.html
│   ├── crl-v1.crl
│   ├── crl-v2.crl
│   └── index.html
└── CA_ROOT_2016
    ├── ca.crt
    ├── certdb.xml
    ├── certs
    │   ├── 01.crt
    │   ├── 01.html
    │   ├── 01.pem
    │   ├── 02.crt
    │   ├── 02.html
    │   ├── 02.pem
    │   ├── expired.html
    │   ├── index.html
    │   ├── revoked.html
    │   └── valid.html
    ├── crl-v1.crl
    ├── crl-v2.crl
    └── index.html
```

At this point the issuing CA may commence creating end use certificates.
For many private CAs this generally implies that the issuing CA will
create and archive the end use private key as well.

## Example

An employee private key and certificate is created thus:

```
csp CA_ISSUER_2016 issue \
  --type=user \
  --days=528 \
  --digest=SHA512 \
  --keysize=4096 \
  --email=useremail@harte-lyne.ca \
  --url=mailto:useremail@harte-lyne.ca \
  "CN=User Name,OU=Employee,O=Harte & Lyne Limited,L=Hamilton,ST=Ontario,C=CA,DC=hamilton,DC=harte-lyne,DC=ca"
```

In these cases distributing the resulting private key:

`csp/CA_ISSUER_2016/private/keys/HH.pem`

and certificate:

`csp/CA_ISSUER_2016/certs/HH.pem`

is the responsibility of the CA operator.  Generally private keys should
be encrypted when created and the two elements should be packaged together
for transmission to the end user.  Server keys typically are
not encrypted and so these must be moved to their hosts via some
secure method.  Implicit with unencrypted server keys is that the hosts
they are installed on must be physically secure from unauthorised access.

After each CA management session the operator must regenerate
the Certificate Revocation List (CRL) and rebuild the public website.
Both of these should be updated every thirty (30) days in any case.

The directory for outputting the html files can be any directory or
device accessible from the host. When no output location is specified
on the command line `csp` defaults to `/mnt/floppy`. This usually fails.


```
for CSPCA in CA_ROOT_2016 CA_ISSUER_2016; \
 do  csp $CSPCA gencrl; \
     csp $CSPCA genpublic --export=./public_html/$CSPCA; \
 done;
```

## A most curious error

When signing a new certificate one may encounter the following `openssl` error:

```
140128600782664:error:0E06D06C:configuration file routines:
NCONF_get_string:no value:conf_lib.c:335:group=TESTCA name=email_in_dn
```

This information provided in this error is completely irrelevant to the
actual cause.  The most frequent cause of this error is attempting to add
a certificate to the certificate database (`index.txt`) where the DN of
the new certificate is identical to the DN of a certificate already in
the database AND the setting `unique_subject=yes` is found in `index.txt.attr`.
